# PsySys app

Over the past decade, the network approach to psychopathology has gained considerable attention within the scientific community as an alternative way to conceptualize and study mental disorders (see Robinaugh et al. (2020) for a review). In contrast to the predominant common cause model postulating that a given disorder causes a set of observed symptoms, the network approach focuses on the dynamic interplay between the symptoms that is thought to give rise to, and maintain, the disorder (Borsboom, 2008). Thereby, the network approach breaks down clear disorder boundaries, which has proven fruitful in better understanding not only the heterogeneous structure but also the observed co-morbidity in various mental disorders (Fried et al., 2017).

Most applications of the network approach in practice have relied on the estimation and analysis of personalized networks, aimed at reforming patient-centered care (Burger et al., 2020). However, the considerable limitations of the corresponding statistical methods, mainly linked to the extensive data they require, result in a high participant burden, and thereby complicate their applicability. An alternative method to examine symptom relations has been proposed with Perceived Causal Relationship (PCR) scaling (Frewen, Allen, Lanius, & Neufeld, 2012). Instead of taking on a data-driven approach, PCR scaling relies on the individuals' perceptions to create symptom networks. After identifying the set of symptoms $S$ they are currently dealing with, respondents go through each symptom pair $s_{i},s_{j}$ to indicate the perceived relations between them $r_{i,j},r_{j,i}$, thereby iteratively building their own network. While the PCR method offers a promising alternative to data-driven network estimation techniques, existing clinically adapted versions of the method, such as the PECAN questionnaire (Klintwall et al., 2021), are characterized by a repetitive structure which has been met with increasing dissatisfaction among respondents. Thus, there is the need to explore alternative, more user-friendly, PCR implementations to improve its clinical utility.

This project within the course "Programming: The Next Step" at the University of Amsterdam, will explore an rshiny implementation aimed at allowing respondents to create their perceived causal network in a modular way. To create a stand-alone application, I will embed the psychoeducative content (PsySys - short explanatory videos) I have created for my Master's thesis to build an interactive digital learning experience. This PsySys app will be implemented as a multi-page shiny app in R and will have the following structure: 

- Introduction page
- Instructions: A small instructional video 
- PsySys block 1: Video 1 + Exercise 1 - Select symptoms _(multiple choice) _
- PsySys block 2: Video 2 + Exercise 2 - Indicate causal chains _(possibility to indicate up to 3 causal chains containing 3 symptoms - drop-down menu)_
- PsySys block 3: Video 3 + Exercise 3 - Choose feedback loops _(be presented with possible 2-3 edge feedback loops & choose which ones apply)_
- PCR network: Be presented with the PCR network with the option to download the image


**References** <br />
$\qquad$ Borsboom, D. (2008). Psychometric perspectives on diagnostic systems. _Journal of Clinical Psychology, 64 (9)_, 1089–1108. <br />
$\qquad$ Burger, J., van der Veen, D. C., Robinaugh, D. J., Quax, R., Riese, H., Schoevers, R. A., & Epskamp, S. (2020). Bridging the gap between complexity science and clinical practice by formalizing idiographic theories: a computational model of functional analysis. _BMC medicine, 18 (1)_, 1–18. <br />
$\qquad$ Frewen, P. A., Allen, S. L., Lanius, R. A., & Neufeld, R. W. (2012). Perceived causal relations: novel methodology for assessing client attributions about causal associations between variables including symptoms and functional impairment. _Assessment, 19 (4)_, 480–493. <br />
$\qquad$ Fried, E. I., van Borkulo, C. D., Cramer, A. O., Boschloo, L., Schoevers, R. A., & Borsboom, D. (2017). Mental disorders as networks of problems: a review of recent insights. _Social psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 52 (1)_, 1–10. <br />
$\qquad$ Klintwall, L., Bellander, M., & Cervin, M. (2021). Perceived causal problem networks: Reliability, central problems, and clinical utility for depression. _Assessment_, 10731911211039281.
$\qquad$ Robinaugh, D. J., Hoekstra, R. H., Toner, E. R., & Borsboom, D. (2020). The network approach to psychopathology: A review of the literature 2008–2018 and an agenda for future research. _Psychological Medicine, 50 (3)_, 353–366. <br />
